URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2075-1729/13/1/125
# Berberine—A Promising Therapeutic Approach to Polycystic Ovary Syndrome in Infertile/Pregnant Women

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a disorder with an unknown etiology that features a wide range of endocrine and metabolic abnormalities that hamper fertility. PCOS women experience difficulties getting pregnant, and if pregnant, they are prone to miscarriage, gestational diabetes, pregnancy-induced hypertension and preeclampsia, high fetal morbidity, and perinatal mortality. Insulin, the pancreatic hormone best known for its important role in glucose metabolism, has an underrated position in reproduction. PCOS women who have associated insulin resistance (with consequent hyperinsulinemia) have fertility issues and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Lowering the endogen insulin levels and insulin resistance appears to be a target to improve fertility and pregnancy outcomes in those women. Berberine is an alkaloid with a high concentration in various medicinal herbs that exhibits a hypoglycaemic effect alongside a broad range of other therapeutic activities. Its medical benefits may stand up for treating different conditions, including diabetes mellitus. So far, a small number of pharmacological/clinical trials available in the English language draw attention towards the good results of berberine’s use in PCOS women with insulin resistance for improving fertility and pregnancy outcomes. Our study aims to uncover how berberine can counteract the negative effect of insulin resistance in PCOS women and improve fertility and pregnancy outcomes.

As mentioned before, berberine and its metabolites exhibit various metabolic activities, its hypoglycaemic effect being exploited today as an alternative therapy in diabetes. It is very interesting to see the intricate pathways via which berberine exerts its hypoglycaemic effect. It alleviates insulin resistance, promotes insulin secretion, promotes glucose uptake, induces glycolysis, and inhibits gluconeogenesis in the liver [21,29,38,46]. Understanding the way berberine acts and lowers endogen insulin levels, thereby reducing hyperinsulinemia side effects, can be exploited in clinical practice by adding BBR in everyday therapy to alleviate PCOS pregnant and nonpregnant women’s hyperinsulinemia side effects

The insulin receptor (InsR) is a vital factor in the insulin signaling pathway. BBR increases the activity of InsR mRNA and upregulates protein kinase C-dependent InsR expression, thereby effectively increasing glucose utilization and improving IR. Simultaneously, BBR upregulates InsR gene expression in muscle and in the liver in a protein kinase D- (PKD-) dependent manner, which contributed to promoting insulin sensitivity. [38,47,48].
Another mechanism by which BBR acts as an insulin-sensitizing agent is via the AMP-dependent protein kinase (AMPK) pathway. AMP-dependent protein kinase is crucial for the body’s systemic energy homeostasis [38]. BBR enhances insulin sensitivity to maintain glucose homeostasis through AMPK activation in muscle and adipose tissue via two main mechanisms: BBR inhibits respiratory complex I of the mitochondrion, thereby stimulating the AMPK activity, and BBR upregulates the expression of sirtuin 1(SIRT1) in adipose tissue so that the AMPK pathway can be activated [38,49]. Furthermore, BBR interferes with glycolipid metabolism in muscle tissues by promoting the expression of insulin-sensitive glucose transporters (GLUT4), alongside the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors a (PPARa) and, in the fat tissue, BBR regulates the expression of positive transcription elongation factor b [17,29,50,51]. In vitro exposure of skeletal muscle cells to berberine increases the protein expression of PPARa and the mRNA expression of Glut-4, thus upregulating PPARa and Glut-4 expression, improving cellular glucose uptake, and lowering glucose plasma levels [17,29,50]. Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) is a hormone derived from the liver with important roles in body metabolism. In the animal model, BBR regulates glucose metabolism and increases insulin sensitivity by inducing FGF21 production and secretion and promoting white fat browning [38]. Other mechanisms of increasing insulin sensitivity and alleviating IR include BBR’s activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) pathway, which in turn raises GLUT4; BBR’s inhibition of the protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B activity in adipocytes in a dose-dependent manner; BBR’s inhibition of the intestinal α-glucosidase (thus reducing the intestinal absorption of monosaccharides); the inhibition of the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)/toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)/tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α signaling pathway (preventing insulin resistance worsening); and BBR’s alleviation of the IR via regulation on the protein phosphatase, Mg2+/Mn2+-dependent 1B (PPM1B) signaling pathway [27,35,38,47,48,51,52,53,54].

Berberine promotes insulin secretion in the following ways: BBR stimulates insulin secretion by improving PARP-1 protein expression and pancreatic β-cells proliferation; BBR increases the secretion and synthesis of glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1)—an intestinal hormone implicated in stimulating insulin secretion, promoting pancreatic β-cells proliferation, and regulating glucose metabolism when blood sugar is elevated; BBR enhances insulin secretion in diabetic mice and rat insulinoma cell lines via the activation of the uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2—protein with the function of regulating glucose-stimulated insulin secretion GSIS) and AMPK pathways; and in mice BBR causes pancreatic β-cell proliferation and GSIS through an enhanced insulin/insulin-like growth factor-1 signaling cascade and pathways related to hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α and glucokinase [38,55,56,57].

Our findings show that there is an enormous amount of information on the internet concerning PCOS metabolic and endocrine effects that shadow female fertility and the complications that may occur during pregnancy. Still, little is known about berberine being used to amend PCOS women’s situation. PCOS is still an undeciphered endocrine and metabolic disorder closely related to insulin resistance. Since PCOS women experience insulin resistance effects throughout their entire lives, it is of paramount importance to properly control the disease. This paper aims to draw attention to the severity of hyperinsulinemia complications (because of insulin resistance) in infertile or pregnant PCOS women in the absence of appropriate treatment. Insulin sensitizers control metabolic abnormalities and improve reproductive outcomes by improving insulin resistance in PCOS women. There is encouraging evidence of the superior effect of berberine alone vs. placebo/no regimen regarding the live birth rate, ovulation rate, androgen levels, decreasing fasting plasma glucose, and insulin levels, as well as the lowering of insulin resistance.
