URL: https://www.cell.com/heliyon/fulltext/S2405-8440(21)02441-5
# The effect of low glycemic index diet on the reproductive and clinical profile in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis

Background

Treatment for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) usually initiates with a series of lifestyle modifications such as diet, weight loss, and exercise.
Aims

We, therefore, conducted this meta-analysis to systematically review and evaluate the possible benefits of LGD on a range of anthropometric, clinical, and biochemical parameters in women with PCOS.
Methods

We performed a systematic search through major indexing databases, including Scopus, Pubmed/Medline, ISI web of science, Embase, Cochrane central, and CINAHL (1966–April 30, 2021) using key concepts of PCOS.
Results

Of 935 initial publications, 542 remain after duplicates removal. Then, 141 records were removed at the title and abstract screening level. After excluding 392 literatures, we finally included 8 articles. The final selected studies included 412 overweight and obese individuals with PCOS (207 cases in LGID group and 205 patients in comparators) with a mean age of 21–32 years. Measured emotional health (3 studies, 132 participants, SMD: -1.97; 95%CI:-3.54, -0.40, P = 0.01, I2 = 89%) and body hair (3 studies, 132 participants, SMD: -0.40; 95%CI:-0.46, -0.35, P < 0.0001, I2 = 0%), were found to be significantly lower in women in LGD vs control diet groups. Moreover, infertility (3 studies, 132 participants, SMD: 1.45; 95%CI: 0.30, 2.61, P = 0.01, I2 = 79%) was significantly higher in women in LGD vs control diet groups.
Conclusion

The present meta-analysis has shown that LGD may play a significant role in reducing the risk and improving the clinical and biochemical features of PCOS. So far the evidences for choosing the best dietary modalities for PCOS are not strong to make a definite recommendation.

The present meta-analysis has shown that LGD can play a significant role in reducing the risk and improving the clinical and biochemical features of PCOS. The best treatment for PCOS is yet to be recognized, but evidence supports a multifactorial approach, including any combination of one or more of the interventions such as diet and lifestyle management, use of pharmaceuticals (oral contraceptives and cyclic progestins, antiestrogens, gonadotropins, and insulin sensitizers), and surgery. In one evaluation of 138 endocrinologists and 172 gynecologists that was carried out by Cussons et al, the majority of respondents recommended that the first line of treatment for all presentations of PCOS should be diet and exercise [43].
As a whole, the two primary strategies for controlling the disease include weight control, insulin production, and insulin resistance [44]. Generally, insulin resistance is present in both obese and non-obese patients with PCOS [45]. Because insulin plays an important role in PCOS and its metabolic features, controlling the disease with diet is the best step for people who want to manage PCOS and its associated symptoms [46, 47]. Approximately, 50% of people with PCOS develop diabetes or pre-diabetes before turning 40 years age [48]; therefore, following a special lifestyle and diets that maintain body weight and eventually increases good insulin levels, reduces the risk of the disease and its associated adverse events [49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54].
Hence, the recommended diet composition for PCOS patients is drawn from the available recommendations for the dietary management of type 2 diabetes. Of note, carbohydrates have been reported to influence PCOS primarily via their impact on insulin concentrations in the blood. Studies demonstrate that a high-fiber, low-glycemic-index diet such as the DASH diet will result in an overall weight loss and a reduction in insulin resistance [33, 55]. A 6-month, low-carbohydrate, ketogenic diet was used by Mavropoulos et al to investigate the influence of a low intake of carbohydrates on obese and overweight patients with PCOS. They observed the amelioration in weight, free testosterone, LH: FSH ratio, and fasting insulin [56]. Serum androgens were also reported to be lowered in individuals who had been consuming a high-fat diet, then began taking an isocaloric, high-fiber, low-fat diet for 8 weeks [57].
Proper diets for weight loss and improving the concentration of lipid and metabolic profiles place great emphasis on the effects of dietary carbohydrates and fats. The results of studies indicate that if the fat intake is reduced from the total energy intake, the consumption of carbohydrates will increase [58, 59]. Patients with PCOS, just like other people must eat, therefore, following special diets such as LGD with potentially positive effects on blood glucose and insulin may reduce the risk of the disease and its associated adverse events [60]. In this context, the improvements were seen in insulin and HOMA-IR may suggest a potential improvement in insulin sensitivity following the use of LGD. In line with our findings, a meta-analysis was conducted by Zafar et al. to evaluate the hypothesis that LGD may lead to lowering measures of blood glucose control in individuals with both types of diabetes. They suggested a potential improvement in insulin sensitivity with LGD compared with other dietary interventions [61].
Recently, Kazemi et al conducted a similar systematic review and meta-analysis of RCTs to review evidence on the effects of GI or GL index diet on cardio-metabolic and reproductive profiles of women with PCOS [62]. They included seven RCTs, including cardio-metabolic and reproductive profiles. Our meta-analysis included eight RCTs and presents clinical outcomes based on PCOSQ domains, including emotional health, body hair, menstrual concerns, and fertility. Having PCOS does not mean the patient can't get pregnant, because this syndrome is among the most common, but treatable, causes of infertility in women. In women with PCOS, the hormonal imbalance interferes with ovulation, so PCOS significantly increases the risk of infertility [63]. The earlier interventions have failed or can be offered as a treatment of the first choice in selective causes that impair the occurrence of pregnancy for the woman with PCOS; therefore, choosing an effective treatment option addresses not only subfertility, anovulation, and fertility plays an important role as a holistic approach [64].
Overall, whether in combination with pharmacotherapy or as a standalone treatment, diet and lifestyle modifications should be recommended in the treatment of women with PCOS. Women with PCOS who are overweight should lose weight through diet and exercise. Their diet should contain high-fiber complex carbohydrates, moderate levels of protein, and a sufficient amount of fat to meet essential fatty acid requirements. It should also focus on omega-3 fatty acids and monounsaturated fatty acids and contain limited amounts of trans and saturated fats, as recommended by available evidence. These dietary modifications should significantly ameliorate many of the symptoms that co-exist with PCOS. Because symptoms of PCOS usually occur with menarche, it is also essential that adolescents who are at risk be screened, and dietary modifications for the prevention of PCOS and related comorbidities be carried out.
