URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-6643/15/18/3872
# The Effect of a Very-Low-Calorie Diet (VLCD) vs. a Moderate Energy Deficit Diet in Obese Women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS)—A Randomised Controlled Trial

Abstract

We performed an open-label, randomised controlled trial to compare the effects of a very-low-calorie diet (VLCD) vs. moderate energy deficit approach on body weight, body composition, free androgen index (FAI), and metabolic markers in obese women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Forty eligible patients were randomly assigned to a VLCD (n = 21) or a conventional energy deficit approach (n = 19) over the same period. After eight weeks, both groups experienced significant weight loss; however, this was greater in the VLCD arm (−10.9% vs. −3.9%, p < 0.0001). There was also a trend towards a reduction in FAI in the VLCD group compared to the energy deficit group (−32.3% vs. −7.7%, p = 0.07). In the VLCD arm, two women (18%) had a biochemical remission of PCOS (FAI < 4); this was not the case for any of the participants in the energy deficit arm. There was a significant within-group increase in the sex-hormone-binding globulin (p = 0.002) and reductions in fasting blood glucose (p = 0.010) and waist to hip ratio (p = 0.04) in the VLCD arm, but not in the energy deficit arm. The VLCD resulted in significantly greater weight reduction and was accompanied by more pronounced improvements in hyperandrogenaemia, body composition, and several metabolic parameters in obese women with PCOS as compared to the energy deficit approach.

Excess weight is an independent risk factor for hyperandrogenaemia, insulin resistance, and menstrual irregularities in women living with PCOS. Weight loss with lifestyle and dietary changes is the mainstay of management of women with PCOS, and it is associated with significant improvements in hyperandrogenaemia, menstrual irregularities, ovulation, and emotional wellbeing in this population [3]. Several dietary interventions have been proposed for the management of PCOS, including VLCDs [18,19,27], energy deficit diets [28,29], and low-GI [30] and ketogenic diets [31,32]. There is, however, no consensus on dietary interventions for optimal weight loss strategies [33]. Recent data from people living with T2DM have shown up to 15% weight loss with VLCDs over twelve weeks in this population [21], which was sustained in over one-third of the study participants at the end of two years. Since the insulin resistance state in people living with T2DM is also seen in women living with PCOS [22], this diet is an attractive option for weight loss in PCOS.
In this study, we presented both within-group and between-group analyses. Although the within-group analysis in a setting for RCT could be biased due to small sample sizes [34], the effectiveness of VLCDs in T2DM is established, and we wanted to compare its effects in the PCOS population. Indeed, in our study, we showed that participants in the VLCD arm lost on average ~11% of their initial body weight after 8 weeks of following a VLCD, while some participants who successfully completed the 16-week follow-up had a mean weight loss of 16%. Participants in the conventional energy deficit group experienced a significant, albeit modest, weight loss (−3.9% from baseline at 8 weeks), suggesting that the use of VLCDs is superior for weight loss in this population, at least in the short term. Our results are in line with previous research [17,35] investigating the effect of VLCDs in women living with PCOS. A mean weight loss of 17% was reported in a retrospective analysis [35] of a 12-week community-based dietary intervention (LighterLife Total (LLT)) consisting of a commercial VLCD in combination with group behavioural change sessions in women with PCOS. Interestingly, this study included a control group of women without PCOS, who experienced a similar weight loss after the use of a VLCD over the same period. In another study involving the implementation of an energy-restricted diet providing 1000 kcal/day, Tolino et al. [17] reported that 54% of the participants had a ≥5% reduction of their baseline weight; nevertheless, no control group was available. Moran et al. [9], tested the efficacy of partial meal replacement with commercial products as part of an energy-restricted diet, and participants reduced their body weight by 5.6 ± 2.4 kg after an 8-week period. Notably, their energy restrictions were more moderate (1000–1200 kcal/d) compared to the energy prescription in our VLCD group (800 kcal/d based on full meal replacement). We reported a slightly lower weight loss with the VLCD in our study as compared to other T2DM cohorts [21]; this could be due to the difference in the mechanism of insulin resistance in women with PCOS as compared to T2DM, and further studies are needed to confirm this effect.
There are very limited data on the effects of VLCDs on hyperandrogenaemia and metabolic outcomes in women with PCOS [18,19,27,36]. In this RCT, we showed that a VLCD caused a significant mean 32% reduction in FAI in the VLCD arm and a non-significant 8% reduction in the conventional energy deficit arm. An observational study [36] compared three months of weight reduction by using a VLCD with the use of an oral contraceptive (OC) pill containing norethisterone in women living with PCOS. This study showed a significant reduction in free testosterone in both the VLCD and OC arm; however, as expected, no significant reductions in body weight or BMI were observed in the OC arm. In the study of Tolino et al., caloric restriction (1000 kcal/d) for four weeks resulted in an increase in SHBG levels and decreases in free testosterone and insulin, with consequent improvement in symptoms of PCOS. Taken together, these findings suggest that a VLCD can be used as an effective management strategy in women living with PCOS who require both amelioration of symptoms of excess androgens and weight reduction.
In this study, we showed that the significant weight loss after eight weeks after both interventions was due to improvements in total and trunk fat masses but also due to reductions in FFM, with these results being in line with earlier studies in PCOS and non-PCOS populations [19]. These changes were greater in magnitude in the VLCD group and can be explained by the greater weight loss experienced by this group. There is increasing evidence that hyperandrogenism in women with PCOS contributes to insulin resistance and metabolic dysfunction in women with PCOS by favouring abdominal and visceral adiposity [37]. The improvement in hyperandrogenism and central obesity mediated by VLCD can improve metabolic dysfunction and associated complications in women with PCOS. Indeed, in parallel with weight loss, reductions in body fat, and hyperandrogenaemia, we observed favourable changes in metabolic markers, including decreases in total cholesterol and fasting blood glucose, in particular in the VLCD group.
This study shows that both VLCD and energy deficit diets can be effectively used in women with PCOS to achieve weight loss with relatively few side effects. One of the study participants in the VLCD had abdominal pain, was diagnosed with cholecystitis, and recovered completely. Some participants had some gastrointestinal side effects, such as constipation and bloating, after starting the VLCD; they were prescribed a fibre supplement to resolve these symptoms, and none of them withdrew from the study due to this reason. It should also be noted that there was a rise in AST and ALT levels in the VLCD arm, which, however, did not reach significance. Increases in hepatic enzymes are a known consequence of rapid weight loss [38], and given the high prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in women with PCOS [39], careful monitoring of liver function is warranted while using VLCD. Neither the VLCD nor the conventional energy deficit approach was associated with significant reductions in BMC or BMD in this study. There are conflicting data [40,41,42,43] in the literature on the effect of short-term weight loss on BMC and BMD, and future studies are needed to confirm these findings using longer-term protocols.
Our study had several limitations. This study was a small, single-centre trial, and thus, future multicentre trials will be needed to further understand the feasibility and efficacy of VLCDs in PCOS. Furthermore, half of the study participants did not complete the clinical trial after randomisation in both study arms. Similar to our study, some previous weight loss studies in PCOS have also reported low completion rates, whilst qualitative studies have shed light on a number of barriers to weight management in this population. In our study, several participants randomised to the conventional energy deficit approach were disappointed by their randomisation order, and some of them were lost to follow-up a few weeks after the initiation of the intervention despite the repeated efforts of the research team to keep them in the study and explain to them the benefits of weight loss and the advantages of the conventional energy deficit approach. In the VLCD arm, many participants limited their engagement with the trial in the food reintroduction period. This limited engagement could be because the main study dietician who was in constant touch with the study participants had moved away in the later stage of the trial and highlights the importance of the interpersonal touch during dietary intervention studies in young populations. It is also possible that the participants did not feel the need to engage with the trial protocols after losing a considerable amount of weight. Other challenges mentioned by the participants over the follow-up were fatigue with sticking to study regimens, challenges in keeping up with social life and family issues, and commitment for follow-up. Finally, the last follow-up after the end of the intervention (eight weeks) was at twelve weeks, and the sustainability of weight loss with these two approaches beyond this period will have to be examined with studies with longer follow-up periods.
5. Conclusions

In summary, the results of this randomised controlled trial comparing a VLCD based on full meal replacement with a conventional energy deficit approach in PCOS suggests that both approaches can be used to achieve short-term weight loss in this population. However, the study found that the VLCD resulted in greater weight loss and more pronounced improvements in body composition, hyperandrogenism, and metabolic aspects related to PCOS. While these findings are promising, these are based on a small, single-centre study, and further large multicentre RCTs are needed to evaluate the widespread use of VLCDs and moderately energy-restricted diets for managing overweight/obesity in women with PCOS.
