URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39861440/
# The Role of Lifestyle Interventions in PCOS Management

As research on PCOS treatment goes on, lifestyle modifications like dietary changes, physical activity, and behavioral changes are recognized as essential components of its management or treatment. Integrating multiple lifestyle modifications provides the most comprehensive benefits in managing PCOS. Evidence shows that these changes help to improve PCOS symptoms like insulin sensitivity, weight management, menstrual cycle regularity, and metabolic parameters. Further, due to heterogeneity in PCOS in terms of phenotypes, clinical presentations, underlined pathophysiology, and response to treatment, personalized interventions are needed. This can be achieved using artificial intelligence to plan individualized dietary/exercise interventions [188]. Further, women with PCOS often experience depression, anxiety, and a diminished quality of life, which can undermine adherence to lifestyle changes. Future research should explore integrative approaches that combine lifestyle interventions with mental health support, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy or mindfulness/meditation practices, which can reduce depression and improve quality of life.

In conclusion, lifestyle modifications, encompassing dietary changes, physical activity, and behavioral interventions, are pivotal in managing PCOS by addressing both metabolic and reproductive complications. Evidence from various RCTs suggests that dietary, interventions such as low-glycemic-index foods; caloric restrictions; high-fiber, ketogenic, and Mediterranean diets; omega three- and antioxidant-rich food; and anti-inflammatory diets help to improve insulin sensitivity and hormonal balance and reduce PCOS symptoms. Out of these, the DASH diet and low-glycemic-index (GI) diet are highly effective for PCOS management as they improve insulin sensitivity, reduce androgen levels, and regulate menstrual cycles. Likewise, regular physical activities (aerobic and resistance exercises) also enhance metabolic function and help to reduce weight, achieve glucose homeostasis, balance hormone levels, and improve overall quality of life. Among all the forms of exercise, the aerobic exercise (AE) was found to be more effective in PCOS. Furthermore, continuous aerobic training (CAT) and intermittent aerobic training (IAT) were found to be equally effective in reducing anthropometric indices and hyperandrogenism and in the improvement of quality of life (QOL) in women with PCOS. Further, the future of PCOS management lies in integrating personalized dietary and physical exercise interventions using technology-driven approaches.
