URL: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5799701/
# Sleep disturbances in women with polycystic ovary syndrome: prevalence, pathophysiology, impact and management strategies

Referral to a sleep specialist allows diagnosis of clinical conditions such as OSA and insomnia, and subsequent treatment. OSA is generally diagnosed using overnight polysomnography to generate AHI. Insomnia diagnosis ideally requires assessment by a clinical psychologist. However, many sleep medicine clinics do not currently have the resources necessary for adequate diagnosis, such as the ISI questionnaire, sleep diaries and measures of daytime fatigue without sleepiness. It important to recognize that OSA and insomnia are frequently comorbid, and also that women with PCOS may have other forms of sleep disturbance.

Weight loss is generally recommended for overweight and obese people with OSA,40 although recent research has indicated that weight loss may only decrease the severity of OSA in a minority of patients.174 As described above, weight loss may be particularly difficult to achieve in many women with PCOS due to hormonal abnormalities and other factors. Weight loss in women with PCOS would improve insulin sensitivity and symptom profiles, including fertility, so research is needed to understand the type and intensity of support required to achieve this. Avoidance of alcohol and sedative medications, which may predispose the upper airway to collapse, is also frequently recommended for OSA.40 Again, this poses a particular difficulty for women with PCOS in view of their anxiety and use of alcohol, possibly as a coping mechanism.175

In cases of mild OSA, oral appliances, commonly known as mandibular advancement splints, which are custom-made to increase upper airway size and reduce the likelihood of airway collapse during sleep, may be recommended.40 However, efficacy and acceptability of oral appliances in women with PCOS is yet to be explored.

A small amount of research has been conducted in women with PCOS about the benefits of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) treatment, involving wearing a mask over the nose during sleep to maintain airway patency. CPAP has been shown to be a promising treatment for OSA in young obese women with PCOS, with improvements in insulin sensitivity, daytime diastolic blood pressure, and cardiac sympathovagal balance after eight weeks of treatment.176 These results indicate the need for a larger, well-designed randomized controlled trial to assess the clinically relevant effects of CPAP treatment on markers of future cardiovascular risk in women with PCOS.177

For the general OSA subpopulation (mostly men), there is now evidence from systematic reviews with meta-analysis that CPAP reduces blood pressure178 and endothelial dysfunction, which promote the development of atherosclerosis.179,180 Thus, CPAP could have a role in primary prevention of vascular disease, despite recent findings that CPAP is not effective in reducing coronary events in those with preexisting vascular disease.181 Systematic reviews with meta-analysis have also indicated that insulin resistance can be improved with CPAP use, thereby possibly reducing the risk of development of type 2 diabetes in nondiabetic and prediabetic individuals.18

Importantly for women with PCOS, a systematic review with meta-analysis has provided evidence that CPAP treatment reduces depressive symptoms.182 A subsequent large, randomized controlled trial of over 2000 individuals with moderate-to-severe OSA and coronary or cerebrovascular disease demonstrated that CPAP was effective in increasing QoL as well as decreasing symptoms of depression and anxiety.183

The American College of Physicians now recommends cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) as the most appropriate treatment for all adults with insomnia.184 This treatment is also recommended as a first-line treatment for insomnia by the British Association for Psychopharmacology.185 The efficacy of CBT in treating insomnia symptoms has been demonstrated in multiple systematic reviews with meta-analyses,186–189 but most sleep clinics do not have clinical psychologists available to provide this treatment. In view of the widespread mental health and other problems reported among women with PCOS, there is a good case for referral to a clinical psychologist who can assess and address problems holistically.

In recent years, trials have been undertaken to assess the efficacy of online delivery of CBT for insomnia, using highly structured internet programs as a means of overcoming the barriers to face-to-face delivery of treatment.190 A recent systematic review with meta-analysis of 15 randomized controlled trials of internet CBT for insomnia found evidence of clinically significant improvements in symptoms, of the order achieved in face-to-face CBT.190 Importantly, the ISI score of patients was found to be reduced overall by 21%,190 and by 15% in a similar systematic review with meta-analysis.191 This option may appeal to women with PCOS as cost-effective, but they should still be encouraged to consult a clinical psychologist or other professional support services for wider problems.

There are well-recognized hazards in using pharmacotherapy for the primary treatment of insomnia. Depending on the type of drug used, negative effects include carry-over daytime sedation, slowed reactions and memory impairment, as well as the potential for intensification of symptoms upon cessation of treatment.173 Pharmacotherapy is only recommended short term.192 This is particularly pertinent for women with PCOS whose insomnia and other sleep disturbances are unlikely to be short term and are related to underlying factors that need to be addressed directly.

Women who experience sleep disturbances, but do not meet the criteria for clinical diagnosis of a sleep disorder, may benefit from sleep hygiene approaches. This includes behavioral and environmental recommendations for promoting sleep.193 Avoidance of smoking and alcohol and regular physical activity are aspects of sleep hygiene that have already been described. Other recommendations include avoidance of caffeine, adhering to regular sleep and wake times and stress management.193 Stress management techniques, such as mindfulness, have been shown to reduce presleep arousal and worry,194 which may be beneficial for women with PCOS. Clinical anxiety requires psychological expertise, however.

As has been highlighted throughout this review, it is common for women with PCOS to experience symptoms that span multiple medical specialties. The management of sleep disturbances among women with PCOS should form part of an interdisciplinary model of care (summarized in Figure 5) with effective communication between care providers.195 It is important that interdisciplinary care is patient-centered195 and emphasizes a holistic approach to health and well-being.


There is mounting evidence for an association between PCOS and sleep disturbances that is complex and possibly bidirectional. This is not simply due to the tendency of women with PCOS to be obese, as associations are seen in PCOS women of normal weight and most associations are upheld after adjustment for BMI. This suggests poor sleep is part of the pathophysiology of PCOS. We view PCOS as a condition of severe metabolic stress that cascades into oxidative and emotional stress. We suggest that multidimensional treatment, including treatment to improve sleep, may improve metabolic function and could potentially prevent long-term cardiometabolic sequelae for these women.

We have identified some important gaps in the literature, with further research recommended. These include a need to fully describe HPA function in women with PCOS, and for further trials of insulin sensitizers and interventions designed to overcome the specific difficulties that women with PCOS have in sustaining physical activity. The implications for sleep deserve specific attention as well as the possibility that bidirectional processes can be harnessed so that improved sleep reduces metabolic stress in women with PCOS.