URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-6643/13/9/2938
# Effect of Nutritional Supplementation on Oxidative Stress and Hormonal and Lipid Profiles in PCOS-Affected Females

Abstract

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) affects several reproductive and endocrine features in females and has a poorly understood etiology. Treatment strategies for PCOS are limited and are based primarily on diet and nutrient supplementation. Recent studies have recommended some nutrients such as vitamins, minerals and vitamin-like nutrients for the therapy for PCOS. Therefore, it is claimed that the cause of PCOS could be vitamin or mineral deficiency. This review provides a narrative on the effect of nutritional supplementation on oxidative stress induced in PCOS. Oxidative stress plays a formative role in PCOS pathophysiology. This article reviews oxidative stress, its markers, nutritional supplementation and clinical studies. We also aim to show the effect of nutritional supplementation on genes affecting hormonal and glucose-mediated pathways.

Insulin resistance, oxidative stress and inflammation are frequently tied to PCOS and also described as the risk factors for the development of metabolic syndrome [71]. A number of inflammatory mediators and chemokines also play important roles in the function of the various female reproductive organs [72,73]. Oxidative stress markers are often associated with increased inflammation. An elevated level of CRP is one of the distinct inflammatory markers that is observed in PCOS individuals, and this phenomenon is also abundantly found in patients with other metabolic syndromes [74]. Interleukin (IL)-18 and monocyte chemoattractant protein1 (MCP-1) are increased in patients with PCOS [75,76]. Patients with PCOS have shown elevated levels of white blood count (WBC) in many studies [77]. The recruitment and activation of leukocytes implemented by the involvement of chemokines such as C-C motif ligand 3 (CCL3) can also lead to metabolic syndrome in PCOS individuals [78]. PCOS and inflammation may be related to low-grade chronic infection. Endothelial inflammation along with markers of endothelial function such as endothelin-1 (ET-1), soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1) and soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (sVCAM-1) have been found to be elevated in women with PCOS [79,80], and women with PCOS and insulin resistance often showed endothelial dysfunction. Women with PCOS exhibited a state of chronic low-grade inflammation, which may help evaluate the changes in biomarkers and their association with cardiac complications.

Significant markers of oxidative stress include: reduced levels of nitric oxide (NO), low total antioxidant capacity (TAC) and higher malondialdehyde (MDA). A meta-analysis by Chan Meng showed that PCOS was associated with serum/plasma nitrite levels. Furthermore, in patients with PCOS, serum or plasma nitrite levels were reduced compared with controls. Based on previous studies, it has been observed that synbiotic supplementation and dietary soy were beneficial in the overall improvement of nitric oxide (NO) levels in patients with PCOS, but other supplementation seemed to have no effect on NO levels. On the contrary, TAC and MDA levels were improved with carnitine supplementation with and without chromium, melatonin, dietary soy, probiotics and vitamin D supplementation. Selenium supplementation should be taken with caution as it may lead to an increased insulin resistance as shown by some studies. Hirsutism, being one of the major consequences of PCOS, was observed and measured in almost all these clinical trials. The supplements which had an overall favorable effect on hirsutism were melatonin supplementation, inositol and selenium supplementation with probiotics. Modified Ferriman¬–Gallaway (mFG) scores, another PCOS indicator observed in these studies, were significantly improved by probiotics and selenium supplementation. A sharp decline in levels of total testosterone was observed with omega-3 fatty acids, carnitine and chromium co-supplementation, melatonin, probiotics, selenium and vitamin D. The studies that failed to show significant positive effects on the improvement of either symptoms or lipid and hormonal assay included supplementation of alpha lipoic acid, curcumin, vitamin E and hydroxysafflor yellow A.
